CHAPTER XII I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep.
I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these
people, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered
the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might
hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain quietly in my hobble,
watching and endeavoring to discover the motives which influenced their actions.
The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. The young woman arranged the cottage and
prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. This day was passed in the same
routine as that which preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors,
and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to
be blind, enjoyed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could
exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable
companion. They performed towards him every little office of attention and duty with gentleness,
and he rewarded them with his benevolent smiles. They were not entirely happy. The young man and
his companion often went apart and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness,
but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange
that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings
unhappy? They possessed a delightful house, for which it was in my eyes, and every luxury.
They had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands when hungry.
They were dressed in excellent clothes, and still more, they enjoyed one another's company and
speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they
really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention
and time explained to me many appearances which were first enigmatic. A considerable period
elapsed before I discovered one of the causes of the uneasiness of this amenable family.
It was poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree.
Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of one
cow, which gave very little during the winter when its masters could scarcely procure food to
support it. They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the
two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old man when they reserved
none for themselves. This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed during the night
to steal a part of their store for my own consumption, but when I found that in doing
this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots,
which I gathered from a neighboring wood. I also discovered another means through which I was
enabled to insist their labors. I found that the youth spent a great part of each day in collecting
wood for the family fire, and during the night I often took his tools, the use of which I quickly
discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days. I remember
the first time I did this. The young woman, when she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly
astonished on seeing such a great pile of wood on the outside. She uttered some words in a loud
voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I observed with pleasure that he did not
go into the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden.
By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed the
method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds.
I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain,
smiles or sadness in the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a god-like science,
and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it, but I was baffled in every attempt I made for
its purpose. Their pronunciation was quick, and the words they uttered, not having any apparent
connection with visible objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could unravel the
mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having remained during the
space of several revolutions of the moon in my hobble, I discovered the names that were given
to some of the most familiar objects of discourse. I learned and applied the words fire, milk, bread,
and wood. I learned the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each
of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was father. The girl was called sister,
or Agatha, and the youth Felix, brother, or son. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned
the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds and was able to pronounce them. I distinguished
several other words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as good, dearest,
unhappy. I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of the cottagers
greatly endeared them to me. When they were unhappy, I felt depressed. When they rejoiced,
I sympathized in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other happened
under the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced me to the superior
accomplishments of my friends. The old man, I could perceive, often endeavored to encourage
his children, as sometimes I found that he called to them to cast off their melancholy.
He would talk in a cheerful accent, and the expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
upon me. Agatha listened with respect. Her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavored
to wipe away unperceived, but I found, generally found, that her countenance and tone were more
cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was
always the saddest of the group, and even to my unpracticed senses he appears to have suffered
more deeply than his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful
of that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man.
I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight,
marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried
with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy
ground. Early in the morning, before she had risen, he had cleared away the snow that obstructed her
path to the milk house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse,
where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand.
In the day, I believed, he worked sometimes for a neighboring farmer, because he often went forth
and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times, he worked in the
garden, but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and Agatha.
This reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees I discovered that he uttered many
of the same sounds when he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the
paper signs for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also.
But how was that possible when I did not even understand the sounds for which they stood as
signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow any kind
of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavor, for I easily perceived,
although I eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought not make to the attempt
until I at first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them
overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to
my eyes had made me acquainted. I admired the perfect forms of my cottagers, their grace,
beauty, and delicate complexions, but how I was terrified when I viewed myself in the transparent
pool. At first I stared back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who reflected in the mirror,
and when I became fully convinced that I was in reality the monster that I am,
I was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
Alas, I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity.
As the sun became warmer and the light of the day longer, the snows vanished, and I beheld
the bare trees and black earth. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving
indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, after which I found, was coarse,
but it was wholesome, and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants
sprang up in the garden, which they dressed, and these signs of comfort increased daily
as the season advanced. The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon when it did not
rain, and I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took
place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it
had been. My mode of life and my hobble was uniform. During the morning I attended the
motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in various occupations I slept.
The remainder of the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to rest,
if there was any moon or the night was starlight, I went to the woods and collected my own food
and fuel for the cottage. When I returned as often as it was necessary, I cleared their path
the snow and performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these
labors, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them, and once or twice I heard them
on these occasions utter the words, good spirit, wonderful, but I did not then understand the
signification of these terms. My thoughts now become more active, and I long to discover the
motives and feelings of these lovely creatures. I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so
miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought, foolish wrench, that it might be in my power to restore
happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the venerable blind
father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix flitted before me. I looked upon them as superior
beings who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand
pictures of presenting myself to them and their gentle reception of me. I imagined that they would
be disgusted until, by my gentle demeanor and conciliating words, I should first win their favor
and afterwards their love. These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh
to the acquiring the art of language. My organs were indeed harsh but supple, and although my
voice was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood
with tolerable ease. It was as the ass and the lap dog, yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions
were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and excretion.
The pleasant showers and gentle warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth. Men who
before this change seemed to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in
various arts of cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful tones and the leaves began to bud
forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth. Fit habitation for gods, which so short a time before
was bleak, damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enhancing appearance of nature.
The past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
and the future guided by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy. End of chapter 12.